CHAPTER ONE TOMMY AND THE WISHING-STONE


Tommy scuffed his bare, brown feet in the grass and didn’t even notice
how cooling and refreshing to his bare toes the green blades were.
Usually he just loved to feel them, but this afternoon he just didn’t
want to find anything pleasant or nice in the things he was accustomed
to. A scowl, a deep, dark, heavy scowl, had chased all merriment from
his round, freckled face. It seemed as if the very freckles were trying
to hide from it.

Tommy didn’t care. He said so. He said so right out loud. He didn’t
care if all the world knew it. He wanted the world to know it. It was
a horrid old world anyway, this world which made a fellow go hunt up
and drive home a lot of pesky cows just when all the other fellows were
over at the swimming-hole. It always was that way whenever there was
anything interesting or particular to do, or any fun going on. Yes, it
was a horrid old world, this world in which Tommy lived, and he was
quite willing that everybody should know it.

The truth was, Tommy was deep, very deep, in the sulks. He was so deep
in them that he couldn’t see jolly round Mr. Sun smiling down on him.
He couldn’t see anything lovely in the beautiful, broad, Green Meadows
with the shadows of the clouds chasing one another across them. He
couldn’t hear the music of the birds and the bees. He couldn’t even
hear the Merry Little Breezes whispering secrets as they danced around
him. He couldn’t see and hear because--well, because he _wouldn’t_ see
and hear. That is always the way with people who go way down deep in
the sulks.

Presently he came to a great big stone. Tommy stopped and scowled at it
just as he had been scowling at everybody and everything. He scowled at
it as if he thought it had no business to be there. Yet all the time he
was glad that it was there. It was just the right size to sit on and
try to make himself happy by being perfectly miserable. You know, some
people actually find pleasure in thinking how miserable they are. The
more miserable they can make themselves feel, the sooner they begin to
pity themselves, and when they begin to pity themselves they seem to
find what Uncle Jason calls a “melancholy pleasure.”

It was that way with Tommy. Because no one else seemed to pity him, he
wanted to pity himself, and to do that right he must first make himself
feel the most miserable he possibly could. So he sat down on the big
stone, waved his stick for a few moments and then threw it away, put
his chin in his two hands and his two elbows on his two knees, and
began by scowling down at his bare, brown toes.

“There’s never anything to do around here, and when there is, a fellow
can’t do it,” he grumbled. “Other fellows don’t have to weed the
garden, and bring in wood, and drive the cows, and when they do it, it
isn’t just when they want to have some fun. What’s vacation for, if it
isn’t to have a good time in? And how’s a fellow going to do it when
he has to work all the time--anyway when he has to work just when he
doesn’t want to?” He was trying to be truthful.

“Fellows who live in town have something going on all the time, while
out here there’s nothing but fields, and woods, and sky, and--and cows
that haven’t sense enough to come home themselves when it’s time.
There’s never anything exciting or int’resting ’round here. I wish----”

He suddenly became aware of two very small bright eyes watching him
from a little opening in the grass. He scowled at them harder than
ever, and moved ever so little. The eyes disappeared, but a minute
later they were back again, full of curiosity, a little doubtful, a
little fearful, but tremendously interested. They were the eyes of
Danny Meadow Mouse. Tommy knew them right away. Of course he did.
Hadn’t he chased Danny with sticks and stones time and again? But
he didn’t think of this now. He was too full of his own troubles to
remember that others had troubles too.

Somehow Danny’s twinkling little eyes seemed to mock him. How unjust
things were!

“_You_ don’t have to work!” he exploded so suddenly and fiercely that
Danny gave a frightened squeak and took to his heels. “You don’t have
anything to do but play all day and have a good time. I wish I was a
meadow-mouse!”

Right then and there something happened. Tommy didn’t know how it
happened, but it just did. Instead of a bare-legged, freckle-faced,
sulky boy sitting on the big stone, he suddenly found himself a
little, chunky, blunt-headed, furry animal with four short legs and
a ridiculously short stubby tail. And he was scampering after Danny
Meadow Mouse along a private little path through the meadow-grass. He
was a meadow-mouse himself! His wish had come true!

Tommy felt very happy. He had forgotten that he ever was a boy. He
raced along the private little path just as if he had always been
accustomed to just such private little paths. It might be very hot out
in the sun, but down there among the sheltering grass stems it was
delightfully cool and comfortable. He tried to shout for very joy,
but what he really did do was to squeak. It was a thin, sharp little
squeak. It was answered right away from in front of him, and Tommy
didn’t like the sound of it. Being a meadow-mouse now, he understood
the speech of meadow-mice, and he knew that Danny Meadow Mouse was
demanding to know who was running in his private little path. Tommy
suspected by the angry sound of Danny’s voice that he meant to fight.

Tommy hesitated. Then he stopped. He didn’t want to fight. You see,
he knew that he had no business in that path without an invitation
from the owner. If it had been his own path he would have been eager
to fight. But it wasn’t, and so he thought it best to avoid trouble.
He turned and scampered back a little way to a tiny branch path. He
followed this until it also branched, and then took the new path.

But none of these paths really belonged to him. He wanted some of his
very own. Now the only way to have a private path of your very own in
the Green Meadows is to make it, unless you are big enough and strong
enough to take one away from some one else.

So Tommy set to work to make a path of his own, and he did it by
cutting the grass one stem at a time. The very tender ones he ate. The
dry ones he carried to an old board he had discovered, and under this
he made a nest, using the finest, softest grasses for the inside. Of
course it was work. As a matter of fact, had he, as a boy, had to work
one-tenth as much or as hard as he now had to work as a meadow-mouse,
he would have felt sure that he was the most abused boy who ever lived.
But, being a meadow-mouse, he didn’t think anything about it, and
scurried back and forth as fast as ever he could, just stopping now and
then to rest. He knew that he must work for everything he had--that
without work he would have nothing. And somehow this all seemed
perfectly right. He was busy, and in keeping busy he kept happy.

Presently, as he sat down to rest a minute, a Merry Little Breeze came
hurrying along, and brought with it just the faintest kind of a sound.
It made his heart jump. Every little unexpected sound made his heart
jump. He listened with all his might. There it was again! Something
was stealing very, very softly through the grass. He felt sure it was
danger of some kind. Then he did a foolish thing--he ran. You see, he
was so frightened that he felt that he just couldn’t sit still a second
longer. So he ran. The instant he moved, something big and terrible
sprang at him, and two great paws with sharp claws spread out all but
landed on him. He gave a frightened squeak, and darted under a fallen
old fence-post that lay half hidden in the tall grass.

“What’s the matter with you?” demanded a voice. Tommy found that he had
company. It was another meadow-mouse.

“I--I’ve had such a narrow escape!” panted Tommy. “A terrible creature
with awful claws almost caught me!”

The stranger peeped out to see. “Pooh!” said he, “that was only a cat.
Cats don’t know much. If you keep your ears and eyes open, it’s easy
enough to fool cats. But they are a terrible nuisance, just the same,
because they are always prowling around when you least expect them.
I hate cats! It is bad enough to have to watch out all the time for
enemies who live on the Green Meadows, without having to be always
looking to see if a cat is about. A cat hasn’t any excuse at all. It
has all it wants to eat without trying to catch us. It hunts just out
of love of cruelty. Now Reddy Fox has some excuse; he has to eat. Too
bad he’s so fond of meadow-mice. Speaking of Reddy, have you seen him
lately?”

Tommy shook his head. “I guess it’s safe enough to go out now,”
continued the stranger. “I know where there is a lot of dandy corn;
let’s go get some.”

Tommy was quite willing. The stranger led the way. First he looked
this way and that way, and listened for any sound of danger. Tommy did
likewise. But the way seemed clear, and away they scampered. Right away
Tommy was happy again. He had forgotten his recent fright. That is the
way with little people of the Green Meadows. But he didn’t forget to
keep his ears and his eyes wide open for new dangers. They reached
the corn safely, and then such a feast as they did have! It seemed to
Tommy that never had he tasted anything half so good. Right in the
midst of the feast, the stranger gave a faint little squeak and darted
under a pile of old cornstalks. Tommy didn’t stop to ask questions, but
followed right at his heels. A big, black shadow swept over them and
then passed on. Tommy peeped out. There was a great bird with huge,
broad wings sailing back and forth over the meadows.

“It’s old Whitetail the Marsh Hawk. He didn’t get us that time!”
chuckled the stranger, and crept back to the delicious corn. In two
minutes, they were having as good a time as before, just as if they
hadn’t had a narrow escape. When they had eaten all they could hold,
the stranger went back to his old fence-post and Tommy returned to his
own private paths and the snug nest he had built under the old board.
He was sleepy, and he curled up for a good long nap.

When he awoke, the first stars were beginning to twinkle down at him
from the sky, and Black Shadows lay over the Green Meadows. He found
that he could see quite as well as in the light of day, and, because
he was already hungry again, he started out to look for something to
eat. Something inside warned him that he must watch out for danger now
just as sharply as before, though the Black Shadows seemed to promise
safety. Just what he was to watch out for he didn’t know, still every
few steps he stopped to look and listen.

He found that this was visiting time among the meadow-mice, and he
made a great many friends. There was a great deal of scurrying back
and forth along private little paths, and a great deal of squeaking.
At least, that is what Tommy would have called it had he still been a
boy, but as it was, he understood it perfectly, for it was meadow-mouse
language. Suddenly not a sound was to be heard, not a single squeak or
the sound of scurrying feet. Tommy sat perfectly still and held his
breath. He didn’t know why, but something inside told him to, and he
did. Then something passed over him. It was like a Black Shadow, and it
was just as silent as a Black Shadow. But Tommy knew that it wasn’t
a Black Shadow, for out of it two great, round, fierce, yellow eyes
glared down and struck such terror to his heart that it almost stopped
beating. But they didn’t see him, and he gave a tiny sigh of relief as
he watched the grim living shadow sail on. While he watched, there was
a frightened little squeak, two legs with great curved claws dropped
down from the shadow, plunged into the grass, and when they came up
again they held a little limp form. A little mouse had moved when he
shouldn’t have, and Hooty the Owl had caught a dinner.

A dozen times that night Tommy sat quite frozen with fear while Hooty
passed, but after each time he joined with his fellows in merry-making
just as if there was no such thing as this terrible feathered hunter
with the silent wings, only each one was ready to hide at the first
sign of danger. When he grew tired of playing and eating, he returned
to his snug nest under the old board to sleep. He was still asleep
there the next morning when, without any warning, the old board was
lifted. In great fright Tommy ran out of his nest, and at once there
was a great shout from a huge giant, who struck at him with a stick
and then chased him, throwing sticks and stones, none of which hit
him, but which frightened him terribly. He dodged down a little path
and ran for his life, while behind him he heard the giant (it was just
a boy) shouting and laughing as he poked about in the grass trying to
find poor Tommy, and Tommy wondered what he could be laughing about,
and what fun there could be in frightening a poor little meadow-mouse
almost to death.

Later that very same morning, while he was hard at work cutting a
new path, he heard footsteps behind him, and turned to see a big,
black bird stalking along the little path. He didn’t wait for closer
acquaintance, but dived into the thick grass, and, as he did so, the
big, black bird made a lunge at him, but missed him. It was his first
meeting with Blacky the Crow, and he had learned of one more enemy to
watch out for.

[Illustration: BLACKY THE CROW]

But most of all he feared Reddy Fox. He never could be quite sure when
Reddy was about. Sometimes it would be in broad daylight, and sometimes
in the stilly night. The worst of it was, Reddy seemed to know all
about the ways of meadow-mice, and would lie perfectly still beside a
little path until an unsuspecting mouse came along. Then there would
be a sudden spring, a little squeak cut short right in the middle, and
there would be one less happy little worker and playmate. So Tommy
learned to look and listen before he started for any place, and then to
scurry as fast as ever he could.

Twice Mr. Gopher Snake almost caught him, and once he got away from
Billy Mink by squeezing into a hole between some roots too small for
Billy to get in. It was a very exciting life, very exciting indeed.
He couldn’t understand why, when all he wanted was to be allowed to
mind his own business and work and play in peace, he must be forever
running or hiding for his life. He loved the sweet meadow-grasses and
the warm sunshine. He loved to hear the bees humming and the birds
singing. He thought the Green Meadows the most beautiful place in all
the Great World, and he was very happy when he wasn’t frightened; but
there was hardly an hour of the day or night that he didn’t have at
least one terrible fright.

Still, it was good to be alive and explore new places. There was a
big rock in front of him right now. He wondered if there was anything
to eat on top of it. Sometimes he found the very nicest seeds in the
cracks of big rocks. This one looked as if it would not be very hard to
scramble up on. He felt almost sure that he would find some treasure
up there. He looked this way and that way to make sure no one was
watching. Then he scrambled up on the big rock.

For a few minutes, Tommy stared out over the Green Meadows. They were
very beautiful. It seemed to him that they never had been so beautiful,
or the songs of the birds so sweet, or the Merry Little Breezes, the
children of Old Mother West Wind, so soft and caressing. He couldn’t
understand it all, for he wasn’t a meadow-mouse--just a barefooted boy
sitting on a big stone that was just made to sit on.

As he looked down, he became aware of two very small bright eyes
watching him from a little opening in the grass. He knew them right
away. Of course he did. They were the eyes of Danny Meadow Mouse. They
were filled with curiosity, a little doubtful, a little fearful, but
tremendously interested. Tommy smiled, and felt in his pocket for some
cracker-crumbs. Danny ran away at the first move, but Tommy scattered
the crumbs where he could find them, as he was sure to come back.

Tommy stood up and stretched. Then he turned and looked curiously
at the stone on which he had been sitting. “I believe it’s a real
wishing-stone,” said he. Then he laughed aloud. “I’m glad I’m not
a meadow-mouse, but just a boy!” he cried. “I guess those cows are
wondering what has become of me.”

He started toward the pasture, and now there was no frown darkening
his freckled face. It was clear and good to see, and he whistled as he
trampled along. Once he stopped and grinned sheepishly as his blue
eyes drank in the beauty of the Green Meadows and beyond them the Green
Forest. “And I said there was nothing interesting or exciting going on
here! Why, it’s the most exciting place I ever heard of, only I didn’t
know it before!” he muttered. “Gee, I _am_ glad I’m not a meadow-mouse,
and if ever I throw sticks or stones at one again, I--well I hope I
turn into one!”

And though Danny Meadow Mouse, timidly nibbling at the cracker-crumbs,
didn’t know it, he had one less enemy to be afraid of!




CHAPTER TWO HOW TOMMY LEARNED TO ADMIRE THUNDERER THE RUFFED GROUSE


From over in the Green Forest where the silver beeches grow, came a
sound which made Tommy stop to listen. For a minute or two all was
still. Then it came again, a deep, throbbing sound that began slowly
and then grew faster and faster until it ended in a long rumble like
distant thunder. Tommy knew it couldn’t be that, for there wasn’t a
cloud in the sky; and anyway it wasn’t the season of thunder-storms.
Again he heard that deep hollow throbbing grow fast and faster until
there was no time between the beats and it became a thunderous rumble;
and for some reason which he could not have explained, Tommy felt his
pulse beat faster in unison, and a strange sense of joyous exhilaration.

_Drum--drum--drum--drum--drum, drum, drum, dr-r-r-r-r-r-um!_ The sound
beat out from beyond the hemlocks and rolled away through the woods.

“It’s an old cock-partridge drumming.” Tommy had a way of talking to
himself when he was alone. “He’s down on that old beech log at the head
of the gully. Gee, I’d like to see him! Bet it’s the same one that
was there last year. Dad says that old log is a reg’lar drumming-log
and he’s seen partridges drum there lots of times. And yet he doesn’t
really know how they make all that noise. Says some folks say they
beat the log with their wings, and, because it’s hollow, it makes that
sound. Don’t believe it, though. They’d break their wings doing that.
Besides, that old log isn’t much hollow anyway, and I never can make it
sound up much hammering it with a stick; so how could a partridge do it
with nothing but his wings?

“Some other folks say they do it by hitting their wings together over
their backs; but I don’t see any sense in that, because their wings are
mostly feathers. And some say they beat their sides to make the noise;
but if they do that, I should think they’d knock all the wind out of
themselves and be too sore to move. Bet if I could ever catch ol’
Thunderer drumming, I’d find out how he does it! I know what I’ll do!
I’ll go over to the old wishing-stone. Wonder why I didn’t think of it
before. Then I’ll find out a lot.”

He thrust his hands into his pockets and trudged up the Crooked Little
Path, out of the Green Forest, and over to the great gray stone on
the edge of the Green Meadows where once a wish had come true, or had
seemed to come true, anyway, and where he had learned so much about the
life of Danny Meadow Mouse. As he tramped, his thoughts were all of
Thunderer the Ruffed Grouse, whom he called a partridge, and some other
people call a pheasant, but who is neither.

Many times had Tommy been startled by having the handsome bird spring
into the air from almost under his feet, with a noise of wings that was
enough to scare anybody. It was because of this and the noise of his
drumming that Tommy called him Thunderer.

With a long sigh of satisfaction, for he was tired, Tommy sat down on
the wishing-stone, planted his elbows on his knees, dropped his chin in
his hands, looked over to the Green Forest through half-closed eyes,
and wished.

“I wish,” said he, slowly and earnestly, “I could be a partridge.” He
meant, of course, that he could be a grouse.

Just as had happened before when he had expressed such a wish on the
old wishing-stone, the very instant the words were out of his mouth, he
ceased to be a boy. He was a tiny little bird, like nothing so much as
a teeny, weeny chicken, a soft little ball of brown and yellow, one of
a dozen, who all looked alike as they scurried after their little brown
mother in answer to her anxious cluck.

Behind them, on the ground, cunningly hidden back of a fallen tree, was
an empty nest with only some bits of shell as a reminder that, just a
few hours before, it had contained twelve buff eggs. Now Tommy and his
brothers and sisters didn’t give the old nest so much as a thought.
They had left it as soon as they were strong enough to run. They were
starting out for their first lesson in the school of the Great World.

Perhaps Tommy thought his mother fussy and altogether a great deal too
nervous; but if he did, he didn’t say so. There was one thing that
seemed to have been born in him, something that as a boy he had to
learn, and that was the habit of instant obedience.

It was instinct, which, so naturalists say, is habit confirmed and
handed down through many generations. Tommy didn’t know why he obeyed.
He just did, that was all. It didn’t occur to him that there was
anything else to do. The idea of disobeying never entered his funny,
pretty little head. And it was just so with all the others. Mother
Grouse had only to speak and they did just exactly what she told them
to.

This habit of obedience on their part took a great load from the mind
of Mother Grouse. They hadn’t been in the Great World long enough to
know, but she knew that there were dangers on every side; and to watch
out for and protect them from these she needed all her senses, and
she couldn’t afford to dull any of them by useless worrying. So it was
a great relief to her to know that, when she had bidden them hide and
keep perfectly still until she called them, they would do exactly as
she said. This made it possible for her to leave them long enough to
lead an enemy astray, and be sure that when she returned she would find
them just where she had left them.

She had to do this twice on their very first journey into the Great
World. Tommy was hurrying along with the others as fast as his small
legs could take him when his mother gave a sharp but low call to hide.
There was a dried leaf on the ground close to Tommy. Instantly he crept
under it and flattened his small self to the ground, closed his eyes
tight, and listened with all his might.

He heard the whir of strong wings as Mother Grouse took flight. If he
had peeped out, he would have seen that she flew only a very little
way, and that, when she came to earth again, there appeared to be
something the matter with her, so that she flopped along instead of
running or flying. But he didn’t see this, because he was under that
dead leaf.

Presently, the ground vibrated under the steps of heavy feet that
all but trod on the leaf under which Tommy lay, and frightened him
terribly. But he did not move and he made no sound. Again, had he
peeped out, he would have seen Mother Grouse fluttering along the
ground just ahead of an eager boy who thought to catch her and tried
and tried until he had been led far from the place where her babies
were.

Then all was still, so still that surely there could be no danger near.
Surely it was safe to come out now. But Tommy didn’t move, nor did any
of his brothers and sisters. They had been told not to until they were
called, and it never once entered their little heads to disobey. Mother
knew best.

At last there came a gentle cluck. Instantly Tommy popped out from
under his leaf to see his brothers and sisters popping out from the
most unexpected places all about him. It seemed almost as if they had
popped out of the very ground itself. And there was Mother Grouse, very
proud and very fussy, as she made sure that all her babies were there.

Later that same day the same thing happened, only this time there was
no heavy footstep, but the lightest kind of patter as cushioned feet
eagerly hurried past, and Reddy Fox sprang forward, sure that Mother
Grouse was to make him the dinner he liked best, and thus was led away
to a safe distance, there to realize how completely he had been fooled.

It was a wonderful day, that first day. There was a great ant-hill
which Mother Grouse scratched open with her stout claws, exposing ever
and ever so many white things, which were the so-called eggs of the
big black ants, and which were delicious eating, as Tommy soon found
out. It was great fun to scramble for them, and eat and eat until not
another one could be swallowed. And when the shadow began to creep
through the Green Forest, they nestled close under Mother Grouse in one
of her favorite secret hiding-places and straightway went to sleep as
healthy children should, sure that no harm could befall them, nor once
guessed how lightly their mother slept and more than once shivered with
fear, not for herself but for them, as some prowler of the night passed
their retreat.

So the days passed and Tommy grew and learned, and it was a question
which he did the faster. The down with which he had been covered gave
way to real feathers and he grew real wings, so that he was little
over a week old when he could fly in case of need. And in that same
length of time, short as it was, he had filled his little head with
knowledge. He had learned that a big sandy dome in a sunny spot in the
woods usually meant an ants’ castle, where he could eat to his heart’s
content if only it was torn open for him.

He had learned that luscious fat worms and bugs were to be found under
rotting pieces of bark and the litter of decaying old logs and stumps.
He had learned that wild strawberries and some other berries afforded a
welcome variety to his bill of fare.

[Illustration: BUGS WERE TO BE FOUND UNDER OLD LOGS]

He had learned that a daily bath in fine dust was necessary for
cleanliness as well as being vastly comforting. He had learned that
danger lurked in the air as well as on the ground, for a swooping
hawk had caught one of his brothers who had not instantly heeded his
mother’s warning.

But most important of all, he had learned the value of that first
lesson in obedience, and to trust wholly to the wisdom of Mother Grouse
and never to question her commands.

A big handsome grouse had joined them now. It was old Thunderer, and
sometimes when he would throw back his head, spread his beautiful tail
until it was like a fan, raise the crest on his head and the glossy
ruff on his neck, and proudly strut ahead of them, Tommy thought him
the most beautiful sight in all the world and wondered if ever he would
grow to be half as handsome. While he did little work in the care of
the brood, Thunderer was of real help to Mother Grouse in guarding the
little family from ever-lurking dangers. There was no eye or ear more
keen than his, and none more skillful than he in confusing and baffling
a hungry enemy who had chanced to discover the presence of the little
family. Tommy watched him every minute he could spare from the ever
important business of filling his crop, and stored up for future need
the things he learned.

Once he ventured to ask Thunderer what was the greatest danger for
which a grouse must watch out, and he never forgot the answer.

“There is no greatest danger while you are young,” replied Thunderer,
shaking out his feathers. “Every danger is greatest while it exists.
Never forget that. Never treat any danger lightly. Skunks and foxes and
weasels and minks and coons and hawks and owls are equally dangerous
to youngsters like you, and one is as much to be feared as another. It
is only when you have become full-grown, like me, and then only in the
fall of the year, that you will know the greatest danger.”